Grandmaster (GM) is a title awarded to chess players by the world chess organization FIDE. Apart from World Champion, Grandmaster is the highest title a chess player can attain.

Once achieved, the title is generally held for life, though exceptionally it may be revoked for cheating. The abbreviation IGM for International Grandmaster is also sometimes used, particularly in older literature.

The title of Grandmaster, along with the lesser FIDE titles of International Master (IM) and FIDE Master (FM), is open to all players regardless of gender. The majority of grandmasters are men, but a number of women have also earned the GM title. Since about 2000, most of the top 10 women have held the GM title. There is also a Woman Grandmaster title with lower requirements awarded only to women.

FIDE awards separate Grandmaster titles to composers and solvers of chess problems, International Grandmaster for chess compositions to the former and International Solving Grandmaster to the latter (see List of grandmasters for chess composition). The International Correspondence Chess Federation (ICCF) awards the title of International Correspondence Chess Grandmaster (ICCGM).

Super grandmaster (super GM) is an informal term to refer to the world's elite players, usually players who are serious contenders for the World Championship. In the past this would refer to players with an Elo rating of over 2600, but as the average Elo rating of the top players has increased it has come to refer to players with an Elo rating of over 2700. Super GMs, the number of which has grown considerably over the years, have some name recognition in the world of sport and are typically the highest earners in chess.
In the Ostend tournament of 1907 the term grandmaster was used. The tournament was divided into two sections: the Championship Tournament and the Masters' Tournament. The Championship section was for players who had previously won an international tournament.[4] Siegbert Tarrasch won the Championship section, over Carl Schlechter, Dawid Janowski, Frank Marshall, Amos Burn, and Mikhail Chigorin. These players were described as grandmasters for the purposes of the tournament.

The San Sebastián 1912 tournament won by Akiba Rubinstein was a designated grandmaster event.[3] Rubinstein won with 12½ points out of 19. Tied for second with 12 points were Aron Nimzowitsch and Rudolf Spielmann.[5]

By some accounts, in the St. Petersburg 1914 chess tournament, the title Grandmaster was formally conferred by Russian Tsar Nicholas II, who had partially funded the tournament.[4] The Tsar reportedly awarded the title to the five finalists: Emanuel Lasker, José Raúl Capablanca, Alexander Alekhine, Siegbert Tarrasch, and Frank Marshall. Chess historian Edward Winter has questioned this, stating that the earliest known sources that support this story are an article by Robert Lewis Taylor in the June 15, 1940, issue of The New Yorker and Marshall's autobiography My 50 Years of Chess (1942).[6][7][8]

Earning a chess title, especially the grandmaster title, is not a piece of cake. Few make the cut, and those who do go down in history alongside Bobby Fischer. Many people work very hard on their chess, but their Elo rating stagnates. It takes a lot of hard work and dedication in order to get a chess title.

There are around 800 million chess players in the world and only about 1500 of them are grandmasters. Hence, only about 0.3 % of all registered FIDE players currently hold a grandmaster title.

Still, many chess players wonder if they have the potential to become a grandmaster. What are the official requirements to get a grandmaster title? What does it take to become a grandmaster? What chess skills do you need to play at grandmaster level?

There’s plenty of debate on what makes a chess grandmaster and what it takes to become one. Subsequently, the following article is devoted to the question “What is a Chess Grandmaster?”

Current Regulations To Become A Chess Grandmaster
The chess title Grandmaster is awarded to chess players by the world chess organization, FIDE. Apart from becoming World Chess Champion, being a Grandmaster is the highest title a chess player can reach.

Other official FIDE titles are Candidates Master (CM), FIDE Master (FM) and International Master (IM). Many chess enthusiasts often use the unofficial title “Super Grandmaster” to refer to the world’s best chess players with a 2700+ ELO-rating.

Once a player becomes a chess grandmaster, the title is held for life. There is a Woman Grandmaster title with lower requirements specific to women. However, the Grandmaster title is open to men and women.
To achieve a GM title, chess players usually need to achieve norms in internationally rated tournaments. In order to get 1 GM-norm, a player has to fulfill the following criteria:

The player must play at least 9 games in the tournament (with some exceptions you can read in the FIDE Handbook).
The player has to play against at least two players from federations other than his own chess federation. (with some exceptions you can read in the FIDE Handbook).
At least 50% of the player’s opponents have to be titled-players. On top of that, at least 1/3 (with a minimum of 3 opponents) of the opponents have to be Grandmasters.
The minimum rating of the player’s opponents is 2380.
The Performance Rating of the player who wants to achieve the GM-norm has to be at least 2600.
These 5 criteria are the most important ones you need to fulfill in order to reach 1 GM-norm. Still, it has to be said that there are some more detailed regulations in the FIDE Handbook.

In order to get the Grandmaster title, a player usually needs to get 3 GM-norms (with some exceptions again). In addition, your FIDE rating has to have passed 2500 rating at some point in order to become a Grandmaster.

All the small details aside, it quickly becomes obvious that it is really tough to become a grandmaster. The following example highlights this. Achieving a performance rating of 2600 or more if the rating of your opponents is 2380 means that you need to score at least 7 points out of 9 games.

The Youngest Chess Grandmasters Ever
The record for the youngest grandmaster is currently held by the former World Chess Championship Contender Sergey Karjakin. Sergey earned the Grandmaster title at the age of 12 years and 7 months.

The second youngest Grandmaster is Nodirbek Abdusattorov from Uzbekistan with 13 years and 1 month. The third youngest GM is Parimarjan Negi with 13 years and 4 months.

World Chess Champion Magnus Carlsen was only 5 days older than Negi when he became a Grandmaster. Therefore, he is the fourth youngest GM in the world.

How To Become A Chess Grandmaster
Plenty of skills and attitudes are needed in order to become a Grandmaster. Here’s a brief overview of the most important aspects required: